#LyX 1.3 created this file. For more info see http://www.lyx.org/
\lyxformat 221
\textclass article
\language english
\inputencoding auto
\fontscheme pslatex
\graphics default
\paperfontsize default
\spacing single 
\papersize letterpaper
\paperpackage a4
\use_geometry 0
\use_amsmath 0
\use_natbib 0
\use_numerical_citations 0
\paperorientation portrait
\secnumdepth 3
\tocdepth 3
\paragraph_separation indent
\defskip medskip
\quotes_language english
\quotes_times 2
\papercolumns 1
\papersides 1
\paperpagestyle headings

\layout Title

The Speex Codec Manual
\newline 
(version 1.0)
\layout Author

Jean-Marc Valin
\layout Standard
\pagebreak_top 
Copyright (c) 2002-2003 Jean-Marc Valin.
\layout Standard

Permission is granted to copy, distribute and/or modify this document under
 the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License, Version 1.1 or any later
 version published by the Free Software Foundation; with no Invariant Section,
 with no Front-Cover Texts, and with no Back-Cover.
 A copy of the license is included in the section entitled "GNU Free Documentati
on License".
 
\layout Standard
\pagebreak_top \pagebreak_bottom 

\begin_inset LatexCommand \tableofcontents{}

\end_inset 


\layout Standard
\pagebreak_bottom 

\begin_inset FloatList table

\end_inset 


\layout Section

Introduction to Speex
\layout Standard

The Speex project (
\family typewriter 
http://www.speex.org/
\family default 
) has been started because there was a need for a speech codec that was
 open-source and free from software patents.
 These are essential conditions for being used by any open-source software.
 There is already Vorbis that does general audio, but it is not really suitable
 for speech.
 Also, unlike many other speech codecs, Speex is not targeted at cell phones
 (not many open-source cell phones anyway :-) ) but rather at voice over
 IP (VoIP) and file-based compression.
 
\layout Standard

As design goals, we wanted to have a codec that would allow both very good
 quality speech and low bit-rate (unfortunately not at the same time!),
 which led us to developing a codec with multiple bit-rates.
 Of course very good quality also meant we had to do wideband (16 kHz sampling
 rate) in addition to narrowband (telephone quality, 8 kHz sampling rate).
\layout Standard

Designing for VoIP instead of cell phone use means that Speex must be robust
 to lost packets, but not to corrupted ones since packets either arrive
 unaltered or don't arrive at all.
 Also, the idea was to have a reasonable complexity and memory requirement
 without compromising too much on the efficiency of the codec.
\layout Standard

All this led us to the choice of CELP
\begin_inset LatexCommand \index{CELP}

\end_inset 

 as the encoding technique to use for Speex.
 One of the main reasons is that CELP has long proved that it could do the
 job and scale well to both low bit-rates (think DoD CELP @ 4.8 kbps) and
 high bit-rates (think G.728 @ 16 kbps).
 
\layout Standard

The main characteristics can be summarized as follows:
\layout Itemize

Free software/open-source
\begin_inset LatexCommand \index{open-source}

\end_inset 

, patent
\begin_inset LatexCommand \index{patent}

\end_inset 

 and royalty-free
\layout Itemize

Integration of narrowband
\begin_inset LatexCommand \index{narrowband}

\end_inset 

 and wideband
\begin_inset LatexCommand \index{wideband}

\end_inset 

 in the same bit-stream
\layout Itemize

Wide range of bit-rates available (from 2 kbps to 44 kbps)
\layout Itemize

Dynamic bit-rate switching and Variable Bit-Rate
\begin_inset LatexCommand \index{variable bit-rate}

\end_inset 

 (VBR)
\layout Itemize

Voice Activity Detection
\begin_inset LatexCommand \index{voice activity detection}

\end_inset 

 (VAD, integrated with VBR)
\layout Itemize

Variable complexity
\begin_inset LatexCommand \index{complexity}

\end_inset 


\layout Itemize

Ultra-wideband mode at 32 kHz (up to 48 kHz)
\layout Itemize

Intensity stereo encoding option
\layout Standard

This document is divided in the following way.
 Section 
\begin_inset LatexCommand \ref{sec:Feature-description}

\end_inset 

 describes the different Speex features and defines some terms that will
 be used in later sections.
 Section 
\begin_inset LatexCommand \ref{sec:Command-line-encoder/decoder}

\end_inset 

 provides information about the standard command-line tools, while 
\begin_inset LatexCommand \ref{sec:Programming-with-Speex}

\end_inset 

 contains information about programming using the Speex API.
 Section 
\begin_inset LatexCommand \ref{sec:Formats-and-standards}

\end_inset 

 has some information related to Speex and standards.
 The three last sections describe the internals of the codec and require
 some signal processing knowledge.
 Section 
\begin_inset LatexCommand \ref{sec:Introduction-to-CELP}

\end_inset 

 explains the general idea behind CELP, while sections 
\begin_inset LatexCommand \ref{sec:Speex-narrowband-mode}

\end_inset 

 and 
\begin_inset LatexCommand \ref{sec:Speex-wideband-mode}

\end_inset 

 are specific to Speex.
 Note that if you are only interested in using Speex, those three last sections
 are not required.
\layout Section
\pagebreak_top 
Feature description
\begin_inset LatexCommand \label{sec:Feature-description}

\end_inset 


\layout Standard

This section explains the main Speex features, as well as some concepts
 in speech coding that help better understand the next sections.
 
\layout Subsection*

Sampling rate
\begin_inset LatexCommand \index{sampling rate}

\end_inset 


\layout Standard

Speex is mainly designed for 3 different sampling rates: 8 kHz, 16 kHz,
 and 32 kHz.
 These are respectively refered to as narrowband
\begin_inset LatexCommand \index{narrowband}

\end_inset 

, wideband
\begin_inset LatexCommand \index{wideband}

\end_inset 

 and ultra-wideband
\begin_inset LatexCommand \index{ultra-wideband}

\end_inset 

.
 
\layout Subsection*

Quality
\begin_inset LatexCommand \index{quality}

\end_inset 


\layout Standard

Speex encoding is controlled most of the time by a quality parameter that
 ranges from 0 to 10.
 In constant bit-rate
\begin_inset LatexCommand \index{constant bit-rate}

\end_inset 

 (CBR) operation, the quality parameter is an integer, while for variable
 bit-rate (VBR), the parameter is a float.
 
\layout Subsection*

Complexity
\begin_inset LatexCommand \index{complexity}

\end_inset 

 (variable)
\layout Standard

With Speex, it is possible to vary the complexity allowed for the encoder.
 This is done by controlling how the search is performed with an integer
 ranging from 1 to 10 in a way that's similar to the -1 to -9 options to
 
\emph on 
gzip
\emph default 
 and 
\emph on 
bzip2
\emph default 
 compression utilities.
 For normal use, the noise level at complexity 1 is between 1 and 2 dB higher
 than at complexity 10, but the CPU requirements for complexity 10 is about
 5 times higher than for complexity 1.
 In practice, the best trade-off is between complexity 2 and 4, though higher
 settings are often useful when encoding non-speech sounds like DTMF
\begin_inset LatexCommand \index{DTMF}

\end_inset 

 tones.
\layout Subsection*

Variable Bit-Rate
\begin_inset LatexCommand \index{variable bit-rate}

\end_inset 

 (VBR)
\layout Standard

Variable bit-rate (VBR) allows a codec to change its bit-rate dynamically
 to adapt to the 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset 

difficulty
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset 

 of the audio being encoded.
 In the example of Speex, sounds like vowels and high-energy transients
 require a higher bit-rate to achieve good quality, while fricatives (e.g.
 s,f sounds) can be coded adequately with less bits.
 For this reason, VBR can achive lower bit-rate for the same quality, or
 a better quality for a certain bit-rate.
 Despite its advantages, VBR has two main drawbacks: first, by only specifying
 quality, there's no guaranty about the final average bit-rate.
 Second, for some real-time applications like voice over IP (VoIP), what
 counts is the maximum bit-rate, which must be low enough for the communication
 channel.
\layout Subsection*

Average Bit-Rate
\begin_inset LatexCommand \index{average bit-rate}

\end_inset 

 (ABR)
\layout Standard

Average bit-rate solves one of the problems of VBR, as it dynamically adjusts
 VBR quality in order to meet a specific target bit-rate.
 Because the quality/bit-rate is adjusted in real-time (open-loop), the
 global quality will be slightly lower than that obtained by encoding in
 VBR with exactly the right quality setting to meet the target average bit-rate.
\layout Subsection*

Voice Activity Detection
\begin_inset LatexCommand \index{voice activity detection}

\end_inset 

 (VAD)
\layout Standard

When enabled, voice activity detection detects whether the audio being encoded
 is speech or silence/background noise.
 VAD is always implicitly activated when encoding in VBR, so the option
 is only useful in non-VBR operation.
 In this case, Speex detects non-speech periods and encode them with just
 enough bits to reproduce the background noise.
 This is called 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset 

comfort noise generation
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset 

 (CNG).
\layout Subsection*

Discontinuous Transmission
\begin_inset LatexCommand \index{discontinuous transmission}

\end_inset 

 (DTX)
\layout Standard

Discontinuous transmission is an addition to VAD/VBR operation, that allows
 to stop transmitting completely when the background noise is stationary.
 In file-based operation, since we cannot just stop writing to the file,
 only 5 bits are used for such frames (corresponding to 250 bps).
\layout Subsection*

Perceptual enhancement
\begin_inset LatexCommand \index{perceptual enhancement}

\end_inset 


\layout Standard

Perceptual enhancement is a part of the decoder which, when turned on, tries
 to reduce (the perception of) the noise produced by the coding/decoding
 process.
 In most cases, perceptual enhancement make the sound further from the original
 
\emph on 
objectively
\emph default 
 (if you use SNR), but in the end it still 
\emph on 
sounds
\emph default 
 better (subjective improvement).
\layout Subsection*

Algorithmic delay
\begin_inset LatexCommand \index{algorithmic delay}

\end_inset 


\layout Standard

Every speech codec introduces a delay in the transmission.
 For Speex, this delay is equal to the frame size, plus some amount of 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset 

look-ahead
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset 

 required to process each frame.
 In narrowband operation (8 kHz), the delay is 30 ms, while for wideband
 (16 kHz), the delay is 34 ms.
 These values don't account for the CPU time it takes to encode or decode
 the frames.
\layout Section
\pagebreak_top 
Command-line encoder/decoder
\begin_inset LatexCommand \label{sec:Command-line-encoder/decoder}

\end_inset 


\layout Standard

The base Speex distribution includes a command-line encoder (
\emph on 
speexenc
\emph default 
) and decoder (
\emph on 
speexdec
\emph default 
).
 This section describes how to use these tools.
\layout Subsection


\emph on 
speexenc
\begin_inset LatexCommand \index{speexenc}

\end_inset 


\layout Standard

The 
\emph on 
speexenc
\emph default 
 utility is used to create Speex files from raw PCM or wave files.
 It can be used by calling: 
\layout LyX-Code

speexenc [options] input_file output_file
\layout Standard

The value '-' for input_file or output_file corresponds respectively to
 stdin and stdout.
 The valid options are:
\layout Description

--narrowband\SpecialChar ~
(-n) Tell Speex to treat the input as narrowband (8 kHz).
 This is the default
\layout Description

--wideband\SpecialChar ~
(-w) Tell Speex to treat the input as wideband (16 kHz)
\layout Description

--ultra-wideband\SpecialChar ~
(-u) Tell Speex to treat the input as 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset 

ultra-wideband
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset 

 (32 kHz)
\layout Description

--quality\SpecialChar ~
n Set the encoding quality (0-10), default is 8
\layout Description

--bitrate\SpecialChar ~
n Encoding bit-rate (use bit-rate n or lower) 
\layout Description

--vbr Enable VBR (Variable Bit-Rate), disabled by default
\layout Description

--abr\SpecialChar ~
n Enable ABR (Average Bit-Rate) at n kbps, disabled by default
\layout Description

--vad Enable VAD (Voice Activity Detection), disabled by default
\layout Description

--dtx Enable DTX (Discontinuous Transmission), disabled by default
\layout Description

--nframes\SpecialChar ~
n Pack n frames in each Ogg packet (this saves space at low bit-rates)
\layout Description

--comp\SpecialChar ~
n Set encoding speed/quality tradeoff.
 The higher the value of n, the slower the encoding (default is 3)
\layout Description

-V Verbose operation, print bit-rate currently in use
\layout Description

--help\SpecialChar ~
(-h) Print the help
\layout Description

--version\SpecialChar ~
(-v) Print version information
\layout Subsubsection*

Speex comments
\layout Description

--comment Add the given string as an extra comment.
 This may be used multiple times.
 
\layout Description

--author Author of this track.
 
\layout Description

--title Title for this track.
 
\layout Subsubsection*

Raw input options
\layout Description

--rate\SpecialChar ~
n Sampling rate for raw input
\layout Description

--stereo Consider raw input as stereo 
\layout Description

--le Raw input is little-endian 
\layout Description

--be Raw input is big-endian 
\layout Description

--8bit Raw input is 8-bit unsigned 
\layout Description

--16bit Raw input is 16-bit signed 
\layout Subsection


\emph on 
speexdec
\begin_inset LatexCommand \index{speexdec}

\end_inset 


\layout Standard

The 
\emph on 
speexdec
\emph default 
 utility is used to decode Speex files and can be used by calling: 
\layout LyX-Code

speexdec [options] speex_file [output_file]
\layout Standard

The value '-' for input_file or output_file corresponds respectively to
 stdin and stdout.
 Also, when no output_file is specified, the file is played to the soundcard.
 The valid options are:
\layout Description

--enh enable post-filter (default)
\layout Description

--no-enh disable post-filter
\layout Description

--force-nb Force decoding in narrowband 
\layout Description

--force-wb Force decoding in wideband 
\layout Description

--force-uwb Force decoding in ultra-wideband 
\layout Description

--mono Force decoding in mono 
\layout Description

--stereo Force decoding in stereo 
\layout Description

--rate\SpecialChar ~
n Force decoding at n Hz sampling rate
\layout Description

--packet-loss\SpecialChar ~
n Simulate n % random packet loss
\layout Description

-V Verbose operation, print bit-rate currently in use
\layout Description

--help\SpecialChar ~
(-h) Print the help
\layout Description

--version\SpecialChar ~
(-v) Print version information
\layout Section
\pagebreak_top 
Programming with Speex (the libspeex
\begin_inset LatexCommand \index{libspeex}

\end_inset 

 API
\begin_inset LatexCommand \index{API}

\end_inset 

)
\begin_inset LatexCommand \label{sec:Programming-with-Speex}

\end_inset 


\layout Standard

This section explains how to use the Speex API.
 Examples of code can also be found in appendix 
\begin_inset LatexCommand \ref{sec:Sample-code}

\end_inset 

.
\layout Subsection

Encoding
\layout Standard

In order to encode speech using Speex, you first need to:
\layout LyX-Code

#include <speex.h>
\layout Standard

You then need to declare a Speex bit-packing struct
\layout LyX-Code

SpeexBits bits;
\layout Standard

and a Speex encoder state
\layout LyX-Code

void *enc_state;
\layout Standard

The two are initialized by:
\layout LyX-Code

speex_bits_init(&bits);
\layout LyX-Code

enc_state = speex_encoder_init(&speex_nb_mode);
\layout Standard

For wideband coding, 
\emph on 
speex_nb_mode
\emph default 
 will be replaced by 
\emph on 
speex_wb_mode
\emph default 
.
 In most cases, you will need to know the frame size used by the mode you
 are using.
 You can get that value in the 
\emph on 
frame_size
\emph default 
 variable with:
\layout LyX-Code

speex_encoder_ctl(enc_state,SPEEX_GET_FRAME_SIZE,&frame_size);
\layout Standard

Once the initialization is done, for every input frame:
\layout LyX-Code

speex_bits_reset(&bits);
\layout LyX-Code

speex_encode(enc_state, input_frame, &bits);
\layout LyX-Code

nbBytes = speex_bits_write(&bits, byte_ptr, MAX_NB_BYTES);
\layout Standard

where 
\emph on 
input_frame
\emph default 
 is a 
\emph on 
(float *)
\emph default 
 pointing to the beginning of a speech frame, 
\emph on 
byte_ptr
\emph default 
 is a 
\emph on 
(char *)
\emph default 
 where the encoded frame will be written, 
\emph on 
MAX_NB_BYTES
\emph default 
 is the maximum number of bytes that can be written to 
\emph on 
byte_ptr
\emph default 
 without causing an overflow and 
\emph on 
nbBytes
\emph default 
 is the number of bytes actually written to 
\emph on 
byte_ptr
\emph default 
 (the encoded size in bytes).
 Before calling speex_bits_write, it is possible to find the number of bytes
 that need to be written by calling 
\family typewriter 
speex_bits_nbytes(&bits)
\family default 
, which returns a number of bytes.
 
\layout Standard

After you're done with the encoding, free all resources with:
\layout LyX-Code

speex_bits_destroy(&bits);
\layout LyX-Code

speex_encoder_destroy(enc_state);
\layout Standard

That's about it for the encoder.
 
\layout Subsection

Decoding
\layout Standard

In order to encode speech using Speex, you first need to:
\layout LyX-Code

#include <speex.h>
\layout Standard

You also need to declare a Speex bit-packing struct
\layout LyX-Code

SpeexBits bits;
\layout Standard

and a Speex encoder state
\layout LyX-Code

void *dec_state;
\layout Standard

The two are initialized by:
\layout LyX-Code

speex_bits_init(&bits);
\layout LyX-Code

dec_state = speex_decoder_init(&speex_nb_mode);
\layout Standard

For wideband decoding, 
\emph on 
speex_nb_mode
\emph default 
 will be replaced by 
\emph on 
speex_wb_mode
\emph default 
.
 If you need to obtain the size of the frames that will be used by the decoder,
 you can get that value in the 
\emph on 
frame_size
\emph default 
 variable with:
\layout LyX-Code

speex_decoder_ctl(dec_state, SPEEX_GET_FRAME_SIZE, &frame_size); 
\layout Standard

There is also a parameter that can be set for the decoder: whether or not
 to use a perceptual post-filter.
 This can be set by: 
\layout LyX-Code

speex_decoder_ctl(dec_state, SPEEX_SET_ENH, &enh); 
\layout Standard

where 
\emph on 
enh
\emph default 
 is an int that with value 0 to have the post-filter disabled and 1 to have
 it enabled.
\layout Standard

Again, once the decoder initialization is done, for every input frame:
\layout LyX-Code

speex_bits_read_from(&bits, input_bytes, nbBytes);
\layout LyX-Code

speex_decode(st, &bits, output_frame);
\layout Standard

where input_bytes is a 
\emph on 
(char *)
\emph default 
 containing the bit-stream data received for a frame, 
\emph on 
nbBytes
\emph default 
 is the size (in bytes) of that bit-stream, and 
\emph on 
output_frame
\emph default 
 is a 
\emph on 
(float *)
\emph default 
 and points to the area where the decoded speech frame will be written.
 A NULL value as the first argument indicates that we don't have the bits
 for the current frame.
 When a frame is lost, the Speex decoder will do its best to "guess" the
 correct signal.
\layout Standard

After you're done with the decoding, free all resources with:
\layout LyX-Code

speex_bits_destroy(&bits);
\layout LyX-Code

speex_decoder_destroy(dec_state);
\layout Subsection

Codec Options (speex_*_ctl)
\layout Standard

The Speex encoder and decoder support many options and requests that can
 be accessed through the 
\emph on 
speex_encoder_ctl
\emph default 
 and 
\emph on 
speex_decoder_ctl
\emph default 
 functions.
 These functions are similar to the 
\emph on 
ioctl
\emph default 
 system call and their prototypes are:
\layout LyX-Code

void speex_encoder_ctl(void *encoder, int request, void *ptr);
\layout LyX-Code

void speex_decoder_ctl(void *encoder, int request, void *ptr);
\layout Standard

The different values of request allowed are (note that some only apply to
 the encoder or the decoder):
\layout Description

SPEEX_SET_ENH** Set perceptual enhancer
\begin_inset LatexCommand \index{perceptual enhancement}

\end_inset 

 to on (1) or off (0) (integer)
\layout Description

SPEEX_GET_ENH** Get perceptual enhancer status (integer)
\layout Description

SPEEX_GET_FRAME_SIZE Get the frame size used for the current mode (integer)
\layout Description

SPEEX_SET_QUALITY* Set the encoder speech quality (integer 0 to 10)
\layout Description

SPEEX_GET_QUALITY* Get the current encoder speech quality (integer 0 to
 10)
\layout Description

SPEEX_SET_MODE*
\begin_inset Formula $\dagger$
\end_inset 


\layout Description

SPEEX_GET_MODE*
\begin_inset Formula $\dagger$
\end_inset 


\layout Description

SPEEX_SET_LOW_MODE*
\begin_inset Formula $\dagger$
\end_inset 


\layout Description

SPEEX_GET_LOW_MODE*
\begin_inset Formula $\dagger$
\end_inset 


\layout Description

SPEEX_SET_HIGH_MODE*
\begin_inset Formula $\dagger$
\end_inset 


\layout Description

SPEEX_GET_HIGH_MODE*
\begin_inset Formula $\dagger$
\end_inset 


\layout Description

SPEEX_SET_VBR* Set variable bit-rate (VBR) to on (1) or off (0) (integer)
\layout Description

SPEEX_GET_VBR* Get variable bit-rate
\begin_inset LatexCommand \index{variable bit-rate}

\end_inset 

 (VBR) status (integer)
\layout Description

SPEEX_SET_VBR_QUALITY* Set the encoder VBR speech quality (float 0 to 10)
\layout Description

SPEEX_GET_VBR_QUALITY* Get the current encoder VBR speech quality (float
 0 to 10)
\layout Description

SPEEX_SET_COMPLEXITY* Set the CPU resources allowed for the encoder (integer
 1 to 10)
\layout Description

SPEEX_GET_COMPLEXITY* Get the CPU resources allowed for the encoder (integer
 1 to 10)
\layout Description

SPEEX_SET_BITRATE* Set the bit-rate to use to the closest value not exceeding
 the parameter (integer in bps)
\layout Description

SPEEX_GET_BITRATE Get the current bit-rate in use (integer in bps)
\layout Description

SPEEX_SET_SAMPLING_RATE Set real sampling rate (integer in Hz)
\layout Description

SPEEX_GET_SAMPLING_RATE Get real sampling rate (integer in Hz)
\layout Description

SPEEX_RESET_STATE Reset the encoder/decoder state to its original state
 (zeros all memories)
\layout Description

SPEEX_SET_VAD* Set voice activity detection
\begin_inset LatexCommand \index{voice activity detection}

\end_inset 

 (VAD) to on (1) or off (0) (integer)
\layout Description

SPEEX_GET_VAD* Get voice activity detection (VAD) status (integer)
\layout Description

SPEEX_SET_DTX* Set discontinuous transmission
\begin_inset LatexCommand \index{discontinuous transmission}

\end_inset 

 (DTX) to on (1) or off (0) (integer)
\layout Description

SPEEX_GET_DTX* Get discontinuous transmission (DTX) status (integer)
\layout Description

SPEEX_SET_ABR* Set average bit-rate
\begin_inset LatexCommand \index{average bit-rate}

\end_inset 

 (ABR) to a value n in bits per second (integer in bps)
\layout Description

SPEEX_GET_ABR* Get average bit-rate (ABR) setting (integer in bps)
\layout Description

* applies only to the encoder
\layout Description

** applies only to the decoder
\layout Description


\begin_inset Formula $\dagger$
\end_inset 

 normally only used internally
\layout Subsection

Mode queries
\layout Standard

Speex modes have a query system similar to the speex_encoder_ctl and speex_decod
er_ctl calls.
 Since modes are read-only, it is only possible to get information about
 a particular mode.
 The function used to do that is:
\layout LyX-Code

void speex_mode_query(SpeexMode *mode, int request, void *ptr);
\layout Standard

The admissible values for request are (unless otherwise note, the values
 are returned through 
\emph on 
ptr
\emph default 
):
\layout Description

SPEEX_MODE_FRAME_SIZE Get the frame size (in samples) for the mode
\layout Description

SPEEX_SUBMODE_BITRATE Get the bit-rate for a submode number specified through
 
\emph on 
ptr
\emph default 
 (integer in bps).
 
\layout Subsection

Packing and in-band signalling
\begin_inset LatexCommand \index{in-band signalling}

\end_inset 


\layout Standard

Sometimes it is desirable to pack more than one frame per packet (or other
 basic unit of storage).
 The proper way to do it is to call speex_encode 
\begin_inset Formula $N$
\end_inset 

 times before writing the stream with speex_bits_write.
 In cases where the number of frames is not determined by an out-of-band
 mechanism, it is possible to include a terminator code.
 That terminator consists of the code 15 (decimal) encoded with 5 bits,
 as shown in figure 
\begin_inset LatexCommand \ref{cap:quality_vs_bps}

\end_inset 

.
 
\layout Standard

It is also possible to send in-band 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset 

messages
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset 

 to the other side.
 All these messages are encoded as 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset 

pseudo-frames
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset 

 of mode 14 which contain a 4-bit message type code, followed by the message.
 Table 
\begin_inset LatexCommand \ref{cap:In-band-signalling-codes}

\end_inset 

 lists the available codes, their meaning and the size of the message that
 follows.
 Most of these messages are requests that are sent to the encoder or decoder
 on the other end, which is free to comply or ignore them.
 By default, all in-band messages are ignored.
\layout Standard


\begin_inset Float table
placement htbp
wide false
collapsed false

\layout Standard


\begin_inset  Tabular
<lyxtabular version="3" rows="17" columns="3">
<features>
<column alignment="center" valignment="top" leftline="true" width="0pt">
<column alignment="center" valignment="top" leftline="true" width="0pt">
<column alignment="center" valignment="top" leftline="true" rightline="true" width="0pt">
<row topline="true" bottomline="true">
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

Code
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

Size (bits)
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" rightline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

Content
\end_inset 
</cell>
</row>
<row topline="true">
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

0
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

1
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" rightline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

Asks decoder to set perceptual enhancement off (0) or on(1)
\end_inset 
</cell>
</row>
<row topline="true">
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

1
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

1
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" rightline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

Asks (if 1) the encoder to be less 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset 

agressive
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset 

 due to high packet loss
\end_inset 
</cell>
</row>
<row topline="true">
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

2
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

4
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" rightline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

Asks encoder to switch to mode N
\end_inset 
</cell>
</row>
<row topline="true">
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

3
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

4
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" rightline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

Asks encoder to switch to mode N for low-band
\end_inset 
</cell>
</row>
<row topline="true">
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

4
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

4
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" rightline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

Asks encoder to switch to mode N for high-band
\end_inset 
</cell>
</row>
<row topline="true">
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

5
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

4
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" rightline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

Asks encoder to switch to quality N for VBR
\end_inset 
</cell>
</row>
<row topline="true">
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

6
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

4
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" rightline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

Request acknowloedge (0=no, 1=all, 2=only for in-band data)
\end_inset 
</cell>
</row>
<row topline="true">
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

7
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

4
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" rightline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

Asks encoder to set CBR (0), VAD(1), DTX(3), VBR(5), VBR+DTX(7)
\end_inset 
</cell>
</row>
<row topline="true">
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

8
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

8
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" rightline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

Transmit (8-bit) character to the other end
\end_inset 
</cell>
</row>
<row topline="true">
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

9
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

8
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" rightline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

Intensity stereo information
\end_inset 
</cell>
</row>
<row topline="true">
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

10
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

16
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" rightline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

Announce maximum bit-rate acceptable (N in bytes/second)
\end_inset 
</cell>
</row>
<row topline="true">
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

11
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

16
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" rightline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

reserved
\end_inset 
</cell>
</row>
<row topline="true">
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

12
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

32
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" rightline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

Acknowledge receiving packet N
\end_inset 
</cell>
</row>
<row topline="true">
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

13
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

32
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" rightline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

reserved
\end_inset 
</cell>
</row>
<row topline="true">
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

14
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

64
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" rightline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

reserved
\end_inset 
</cell>
</row>
<row topline="true" bottomline="true">
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

15
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

64
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" rightline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

reserved
\end_inset 
</cell>
</row>
</lyxtabular>

\end_inset 


\layout Caption

In-band signalling codes
\begin_inset LatexCommand \label{cap:In-band-signalling-codes}

\end_inset 


\end_inset 


\layout Standard

Finally, applications may define custom in-band messages using mode 13.
 The size of the message in bytes is encoded with 5 bits, so that the decoder
 can skip it if it doesn't know how to interpret it.
\layout Section
\pagebreak_top 
Formats and standards
\begin_inset LatexCommand \index{standards}

\end_inset 


\begin_inset LatexCommand \label{sec:Formats-and-standards}

\end_inset 


\layout Standard

Speex can encode speech in both narrowband and wideband and provides different
 bit-rates.
 However, not all features need to be supported by a certain implementation
 or device.
 In order to be called 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset 

Speex compatible
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset 

 (whatever that means), an implementation must implement at least a basic
 set of features.
\layout Standard

At the minimum, all narrowband modes of operation MUST be supported at the
 decoder.
 This includes the decoding of a wideband bit-stream by the narrowband decoder
\begin_inset Foot
collapsed true

\layout Standard

The wideband bit-stream contains an embedded narrowband bit-stream which
 can be decoded alone
\end_inset 

.
 If present, a wideband decoder MUST be able to decode a narrowband stream,
 and MAY either be able to decode all wideband modes or be able to decode
 the embedded narrowband part of all modes (which includes ignoring the
 high-band bits).
\layout Standard

For encoders, at least one narrowband or wideband mode MUST be supported.
 The main reason why all encoding modes do not have to be supported is that
 some platforms may not be able to handle the complexity of encoding in
 some modes.
\layout Subsection

RTP
\begin_inset LatexCommand \index{RTP}

\end_inset 

 Payload Format 
\layout Standard

The RTP payload draft is included in appendix 
\begin_inset LatexCommand \ref{sec:IETF-draft}

\end_inset 

 and the latest version is available at 
\begin_inset LatexCommand \url{http://www.speex.org/drafts/latest}

\end_inset 

.
 This draft has been sent (2003/02/26) to the Internet Engineering Task
 Force (IETF) and will be discussed at the March 18th meeting in San Francisco.
 
\layout Subsection

MIME Type
\layout Standard

For now, you should use the MIME type audio/x-speex for Speex.
 We will apply for type 
\family typewriter 
audio/speex
\family default 
 in the near future.
\layout Subsection

Ogg
\begin_inset LatexCommand \index{Ogg}

\end_inset 

 file format
\layout Standard

Speex bit-streams can be stored in Ogg files.
 In this case, the first packet of the Ogg file contains the Speex header
 described in table 
\begin_inset LatexCommand \ref{cap:ogg_speex_header}

\end_inset 

.
 All integer fields in the headers are stored as little-endian.
 The 
\family typewriter 
speex_string
\family default 
 field must contain the 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset 


\family typewriter 
Speex
\family default 
\SpecialChar ~
\SpecialChar ~
\SpecialChar ~

\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset 

 (with 3 training spaces), which identifies the bit-stream.
 The next field, 
\family typewriter 
speex_version
\family default 
 contains the version of Speex that encoded the file.
 For now, refer to speex_header.[ch] for more info.
 The 
\emph on 
beginning of stream
\emph default 
 (
\family typewriter 
b_o_s
\family default 
) flag is set to 1 for the header.
 The header packet has 
\family typewriter 
packetno=0
\family default 
 and 
\family typewriter 
granulepos=0
\family default 
.
\layout Standard

The second packet contains the Speex comment header.
 The format used is the Vorbis comment format described here: http://www.xiph.org/
ogg/vorbis/doc/v-comment.html .
 This packet has 
\family typewriter 
packetno=1
\family default 
 and 
\family typewriter 
granulepos=0
\family default 
.
\layout Standard

The third and subsequent packets each contain one or more (number found
 in header) Speex frames.
 These are identified with 
\family typewriter 
packetno
\family default 
 starting from 2 and the 
\family typewriter 
granulepos
\family default 
 is the number of the last sample encoded in that packet.
 The last of these packets has the 
\emph on 
end of stream
\emph default 
 (
\family typewriter 
e_o_s
\family default 
) flag is set to 1.
\layout Standard


\begin_inset Float table
placement htbp
wide true
collapsed false

\layout Standard


\begin_inset  Tabular
<lyxtabular version="3" rows="16" columns="3">
<features>
<column alignment="center" valignment="top" leftline="true" width="0pt">
<column alignment="center" valignment="top" leftline="true" width="0pt">
<column alignment="center" valignment="top" leftline="true" rightline="true" width="0pt">
<row topline="true" bottomline="true">
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

Field
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

Type
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" rightline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

Size
\end_inset 
</cell>
</row>
<row topline="true">
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

speex_string
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

char[]
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" rightline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

8
\end_inset 
</cell>
</row>
<row topline="true">
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

speex_version
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

char[]
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" rightline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

20
\end_inset 
</cell>
</row>
<row topline="true">
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

speex_version_id
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

int
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" rightline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

4
\end_inset 
</cell>
</row>
<row topline="true">
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

header_size
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

int
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" rightline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

4
\end_inset 
</cell>
</row>
<row topline="true">
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

rate
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

int
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" rightline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

4
\end_inset 
</cell>
</row>
<row topline="true">
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

mode
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

int
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" rightline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

4
\end_inset 
</cell>
</row>
<row topline="true">
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

mode_bitstream_version
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

int
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" rightline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

4
\end_inset 
</cell>
</row>
<row topline="true">
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

nb_channels
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

int
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" rightline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

4
\end_inset 
</cell>
</row>
<row topline="true">
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

bitrate
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

int
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" rightline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

4
\end_inset 
</cell>
</row>
<row topline="true">
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

frame_size
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

int
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" rightline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

4
\end_inset 
</cell>
</row>
<row topline="true">
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

vbr
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

int
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" rightline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

4
\end_inset 
</cell>
</row>
<row topline="true">
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

frames_per_packet
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

int
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" rightline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

4
\end_inset 
</cell>
</row>
<row topline="true">
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

extra_headers
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

int
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" rightline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

4
\end_inset 
</cell>
</row>
<row topline="true">
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

reserved1
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

int
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" rightline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

4
\end_inset 
</cell>
</row>
<row topline="true" bottomline="true">
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

reserved2
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

int
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" rightline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

4
\end_inset 
</cell>
</row>
</lyxtabular>

\end_inset 


\layout Caption

Ogg/Speex header packet
\begin_inset LatexCommand \label{cap:ogg_speex_header}

\end_inset 


\end_inset 


\layout Section
\pagebreak_top 
Introduction to CELP Coding
\begin_inset LatexCommand \index{CELP}

\end_inset 


\begin_inset LatexCommand \label{sec:Introduction-to-CELP}

\end_inset 


\layout Standard

Speex is based on CELP, which stands for Code Excited Linear Prediction.
 This section attempts to introduce the principles behind CELP, so if you
 are already familiar with CELP, you can safely skip to section 
\begin_inset LatexCommand \ref{sec:Speex-narrowband-mode}

\end_inset 

.
 The CELP technique is based on three ideas:
\layout Enumerate

The use of a linear prediction (LP) model to model the vocal tract
\layout Enumerate

The use of (adaptive and fixed) codebook entries as input (excitation) of
 the LP model
\layout Enumerate

The search performed in closed-loop in a 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset 

perceptually weighted domain
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset 


\layout Standard

This section describes the basic ideas behind CELP.
 Note that it's still incomplete.
\layout Subsection

Linear Prediction (LPC)
\begin_inset LatexCommand \index{linear prediction}

\end_inset 


\layout Standard

Linear prediction is at the base of many speech coding techniques, including
 CELP.
 The idea behind it is to predict the signal 
\begin_inset Formula $x[n]$
\end_inset 

 using a linear combination of its past samples:
\layout Standard


\begin_inset Formula \[
y[n]=\sum_{i=1}^{N}a_{i}x[n-i]\]

\end_inset 

where 
\begin_inset Formula $y[n]$
\end_inset 

 is the linear prediction of 
\begin_inset Formula $x[n]$
\end_inset 

.
 The prediction error is thus given by:
\begin_inset Formula \[
e[n]=x[n]-y[n]=x[n]-\sum_{i=1}^{N}a_{i}x[n-i]\]

\end_inset 


\layout Standard

The goal of the LPC analysis is to find the best prediction coefficients
 
\begin_inset Formula $a_{i}$
\end_inset 

 which minimize the quadratic error function:
\begin_inset Formula \[
E=\sum_{n=0}^{L-1}\left[e[n]\right]^{2}=\sum_{n=0}^{L-1}\left[x[n]-\sum_{i=1}^{N}a_{i}x[n-i]\right]^{2}\]

\end_inset 

That can be done by making all derivatives 
\begin_inset Formula $\frac{\partial E}{\partial a_{i}}$
\end_inset 

 equal to zero:
\begin_inset Formula \[
\frac{\partial E}{\partial a_{i}}=\frac{\partial}{\partial a_{i}}\sum_{n=0}^{L-1}\left[x[n]-\sum_{i=1}^{N}a_{i}x[n-i]\right]^{2}=0\]

\end_inset 


\layout Standard

The 
\begin_inset Formula $a_{i}$
\end_inset 

 filter coefficients are computed using the Levinson-Durbin
\begin_inset LatexCommand \index{Levinson-Durbin}

\end_inset 

 algorithm, which starts from the auto-correlation
\begin_inset LatexCommand \index{auto-correlation}

\end_inset 

 
\begin_inset Formula $R(m)$
\end_inset 

 of the signal 
\begin_inset Formula $x[n]$
\end_inset 

.
\layout Standard


\begin_inset Formula \[
R(m)=\sum_{i=0}^{N-1}x[i]x[i-m]\]

\end_inset 


\layout Standard

For an order 
\begin_inset Formula $N$
\end_inset 

 filter, we have:
\begin_inset Formula \[
\mathbf{R}=\left[\begin{array}{cccc}
R(0) & R(1) & \cdots & R(N-1)\\
R(1) & R(0) & \cdots & R(N-2)\\
\vdots & \vdots & \ddots & \vdots\\
R(N-1) & R(N-2) & \cdots & R(0)\end{array}\right]\]

\end_inset 


\begin_inset Formula \[
\mathbf{r}=\left[\begin{array}{c}
R(1)\\
R(2)\\
\vdots\\
R(N)\end{array}\right]\]

\end_inset 


\layout Standard

The filter coefficients 
\begin_inset Formula $a_{i}$
\end_inset 

 are found by solving the system 
\begin_inset Formula $\mathbf{Ra}=\mathbf{r}$
\end_inset 

.
 What the Levinson-Durbin algorithm does here is making the solution to
 the problem 
\begin_inset Formula $\mathcal{O}\left(N^{2}\right)$
\end_inset 

 instead of 
\begin_inset Formula $\mathcal{O}\left(N^{3}\right)$
\end_inset 

 by exploiting the fact that matrix 
\begin_inset Formula $\mathbf{R}$
\end_inset 

 is toeplitz hermitian.
 Also, it can be proven that all the roots of 
\begin_inset Formula $A(z)$
\end_inset 

 are within the unit circle, which means that 
\begin_inset Formula $1/A(z)$
\end_inset 

 is always stable.
 This is in theory; in practice because of finite precision, there are two
 commonly used techniques to make sure we have a stable filter.
 First, we multiply 
\begin_inset Formula $R(0)$
\end_inset 

 by a number slightly above one (such as 1.0001), which is equivalent to
 adding noise to the signal.
 Also, we can apply a window to the auto-correlation, which is equivalent
 to filtering in the frequency domain, reducing sharp resonances.
\layout Standard

The linear prediction model represents each speech sample as a linear combinatio
n of past samples, plus an error signal called the excitation (or residual).
\begin_inset Formula \[
x[n]=\sum_{i=1}^{N}a_{i}x[n-i]+e[n]\]

\end_inset 


\layout Standard

In the 
\emph on 
z
\emph default 
-domain, this can be expressed as
\layout Standard


\begin_inset Formula \[
x(z)=\frac{1}{A(z)}\: e(z)\]

\end_inset 


\layout Standard

where 
\begin_inset Formula $A(z)$
\end_inset 

 is defined as
\layout Standard


\begin_inset Formula \[
A(z)=1-\sum_{i=1}^{N}a_{i}z^{-i}\]

\end_inset 


\layout Standard

We usually refer to 
\begin_inset Formula $A(z)$
\end_inset 

 as the analysis filter and 
\begin_inset Formula $1/A(z)$
\end_inset 

 as the synthesis filter.
 The whole process is called short-term prediction as it predicts the signal
 
\begin_inset Formula $x[n]$
\end_inset 

 using a prediction using only the 
\begin_inset Formula $N$
\end_inset 

 past samples, where 
\begin_inset Formula $N$
\end_inset 

 is usually around 10.
\layout Standard

Because LPC coefficients have very little robustness to quantization, they
 are converted to Line Spectral Pair
\begin_inset LatexCommand \index{line spectral pair}

\end_inset 

 (LSP) coefficients which have a much better behaviour with quantization,
 one of them being that it's easy to keep the filter stable.
 
\layout Comment

Describe LSP's
\layout Subsection

Pitch Prediction
\begin_inset LatexCommand \index{pitch}

\end_inset 


\layout Standard

During voiced segments, the speech signal is periodic, so it is possible
 to take advantage of that property by approximating the excitation signal
 
\begin_inset Formula $e[n]$
\end_inset 

 by a gain times the past of the excitation:
\layout Standard


\begin_inset Formula \[
e[n]\simeq p[n]=\beta e[n-T]\]

\end_inset 


\layout Standard

where 
\begin_inset Formula $T$
\end_inset 

 is the pitch period, 
\begin_inset Formula $\beta$
\end_inset 

 is the pitch gain.
 We call that long-term prediction since the excitation is predicted from
 
\begin_inset Formula $e[n-T]$
\end_inset 

 with 
\begin_inset Formula $T\gg N$
\end_inset 

.
\layout Subsection

Innovation Codebook
\layout Standard

The final excitation 
\begin_inset Formula $e[n]$
\end_inset 

 will be the sum of the pitch prediction and an 
\emph on 
innovation
\emph default 
 signal 
\begin_inset Formula $c[n]$
\end_inset 

 taken from a fixed codebook, hence the name 
\emph on 
Code
\emph default 
 Excited Linear Prediction.
 The final excitation is given by:
\layout Standard


\begin_inset Formula \[
e[n]=p[n]+c[n]=\beta e[n-T]+c[n]\]

\end_inset 

The quantization of 
\begin_inset Formula $c[n]$
\end_inset 

 is where most of the bits in a CELP codec are allocated.
 It represents the information that couldn't be obtained either from linear
 prediction or pitch prediction.
 In the 
\emph on 
z
\emph default 
-domain we can represent the final signal 
\begin_inset Formula $X(z)$
\end_inset 

 as 
\begin_inset Formula \[
X(z)=\frac{C(z)}{A(z)\left(1-\beta z^{-T}\right)}\]

\end_inset 


\layout Subsection

Analysis-by-Synthesis and Error Weighting
\begin_inset LatexCommand \index{error weighting}

\end_inset 


\begin_inset LatexCommand \index{analysis-by-synthesis}

\end_inset 


\layout Standard

Most (if not all) modern audio codecs attempt to 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset 

shape
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset 

 the noise so that it appears mostly in the frequency regions where the
 ear cannot detect it.
 For example, the ear is more tolerant to noise in parts of the spectrum
 that are louder and 
\emph on 
vice versa
\emph default 
.
 That's why instead of minimizing the simple quadratic error
\begin_inset Formula \[
E=\sum_{n}\left(x[n]-\overline{x}[n]\right)^{2}\]

\end_inset 

where 
\begin_inset Formula $\overline{x}[n]$
\end_inset 

 is the encoder signal, we minimize the error for the perceptually weighted
 signal
\begin_inset Formula \[
X_{w}(z)=W(z)X(z)\]

\end_inset 

where 
\begin_inset Formula $W(z)$
\end_inset 

 is the weighting filter, usually of the form
\layout Standard


\begin_inset Formula \begin{equation}
W(z)=\frac{A\left(\frac{z}{\gamma_{1}}\right)}{A\left(\frac{z}{\gamma_{2}}\right)}\label{eq:weighting_filter}\end{equation}

\end_inset 


\layout Standard

with control parameters 
\begin_inset Formula $\gamma_{1}>\gamma_{2}$
\end_inset 

.
 If the noise is white in the perceptually weighted domain, then in the
 signal domain its spectral shape will be of the form
\begin_inset Formula \[
A_{noise}(z)=\frac{1}{W(z)}=\frac{A\left(\frac{z}{\gamma_{2}}\right)}{A\left(\frac{z}{\gamma_{1}}\right)}\]

\end_inset 


\layout Standard

If a filter 
\begin_inset Formula $A(z)$
\end_inset 

 has (complex) poles at 
\begin_inset Formula $p_{i}$
\end_inset 

 in the 
\begin_inset Formula $z$
\end_inset 

-plane, the filter 
\begin_inset Formula $A(z/\gamma)$
\end_inset 

 will have its poles at 
\begin_inset Formula $p'_{i}=\gamma p_{i}$
\end_inset 

, making it a flatter version of 
\begin_inset Formula $A(z)$
\end_inset 

.
\layout Standard

Analysis-by-synthesis refers to the fact that when trying to find the best
 pitch parameters (
\begin_inset Formula $T$
\end_inset 

, 
\begin_inset Formula $\beta$
\end_inset 

) and innovation signal 
\begin_inset Formula $c[n]$
\end_inset 

, we do not work by making the excitation 
\begin_inset Formula $e[n]$
\end_inset 

 as close as the original one (which would be simpler), but apply the synthesis
 (and weighting) filter and try making 
\begin_inset Formula $X_{w}(z)$
\end_inset 

 as close to the original as possible.
\layout Section
\pagebreak_top 
Speex narrowband mode
\begin_inset LatexCommand \label{sec:Speex-narrowband-mode}

\end_inset 


\begin_inset LatexCommand \index{narrowband}

\end_inset 


\layout Standard

This section looks at how Speex works for narrowband (
\begin_inset Formula $8\:\mathrm{kHz}$
\end_inset 

 sampling rate) operation.
 The frame size for this mode is 
\begin_inset Formula $20\:\mathrm{ms}$
\end_inset 

, corresponding to 160 samples.
 Each frame is also subdivided into 4 sub-frames of 40 samples each.
\layout Standard

Also many design decisions were based on the original goals and assumptions:
\layout Itemize

Minimizing the amount of information extracted from past frames (for robustness
 to packet loss)
\layout Itemize

Dynamically-selectable codebooks (LSP, pitch and innovation)
\layout Itemize

sub-vector fixed (innovation) codebooks
\layout Subsection

LPC Analysis
\begin_inset LatexCommand \index{linear prediction}

\end_inset 


\layout Standard

An LPC analysis is first performed on a (asymetric Hamming) window that
 spans all of the current frame and half a frame in advance.
 The LPC coefficients are then converted to Line Spectral Pair
\begin_inset LatexCommand \index{line spectral pair}

\end_inset 

 (LSP), a representation that is more robust to quantization.
 The LSP's are considered to be associated to the 
\begin_inset Formula $4^{th}$
\end_inset 

 sub-frames and the LSP's associated to the first 3 sub-frames are linearly
 interpolated using the current and previous LSP's.
\layout Standard

The LSP's are encoded using 30 bits for higher quality modes and 18 bits
 for lower quality, through the use of a multi-stage split-vector quantizer.
 For the lower quality modes, the 10 coefficients are first quantized with
 6 bits and the error is then divided in two 5-coefficient sub-vectors.
 Each of them is quantized with 6 bits, for a total of 18 bits.
 For the higher quality modes, the remaining error on both sub-vectors is
 further quantized with 6 bits each, for a total of 30 bits.
\layout Standard

The perceptual weighting filter 
\begin_inset Formula $W(z)$
\end_inset 

 used by Speex is derived from the LPC filter 
\begin_inset Formula $A(z)$
\end_inset 

 and corresponds to the one described by eq.
 
\begin_inset LatexCommand \ref{eq:weighting_filter}

\end_inset 

 with 
\begin_inset Formula $\gamma_{1}=0.9$
\end_inset 

 and 
\begin_inset Formula $\gamma_{2}=0.6$
\end_inset 

.
 We can use the unquantized 
\begin_inset Formula $A(z)$
\end_inset 

 filter since the weighting filter is only used in the encoder.
\layout Subsection

Pitch Prediction (adaptive codebook)
\begin_inset LatexCommand \index{pitch}

\end_inset 


\layout Standard

Speex uses a 3-tap prediction for pitch.
 That is, the pitch prediction signal 
\begin_inset Formula $p[n]$
\end_inset 

 is obtained by the past of the excitation by:
\begin_inset Formula \[
p[n]=\beta_{0}e[n-T-1]+\beta_{1}e[n-T]+\beta_{2}e[n-T+1]\]

\end_inset 


\layout Standard

where 
\begin_inset Formula $T$
\end_inset 

 is the pitch period and the 
\begin_inset Formula $\beta_{i}$
\end_inset 

 are the prediction (filter) taps.
 It is worth noting that when the pitch is smaller than the sub-frame size,
 we repeat the excitation at a period 
\begin_inset Formula $T$
\end_inset 

.
 For example, when 
\begin_inset Formula $n-T+1$
\end_inset 

, we use 
\begin_inset Formula $n-2T+1$
\end_inset 

 instead.
 The period and quantized gains are determined in closed loop (analysis-by-synth
esis).
 In most modes, the pitch period is encoded with 7 bits in the 
\begin_inset Formula $\left[17,144\right]$
\end_inset 

 range and the 
\begin_inset Formula $\beta_{i}$
\end_inset 

 coefficients are vector-quantized using 7 bits (15 kbps narrowband and
 above) at higher bit-rates and 5 bits at lower bit-rates (11 kbps narrowband
 and below).
\layout Subsection

Innovation Codebook
\layout Standard

In Speex, the innovation signal is quantized using sub-vector shape-only
 vector quantization (VQ).
 That means that the innovation signal is divided in sub-vectors (of size
 5 to 20) and quantized using a codebook that represents both the shape
 and the gain at the same time.
 This saves many bits that would otherwise be allocated for a separate gain
 at the price of a slight increase in complexity.
 
\layout Subsection

Bit allocation
\layout Standard

There are 7 different narrowband bit-rates defined for Speex, ranging from
 250 bps to 24.6 kbps, although the modes below 5.9 kbps should not be used
 for speech.
 The bit-allocation for each mode is detailed in table 
\begin_inset LatexCommand \ref{cap:bits-narrowband}

\end_inset 

.
 Each frame starts with the mode ID encoded with 4 bits which allows a range
 from 0 to 15, though only the first 7 values are used (the others are reserved).
 The parameters are listed in the table in the order they are packed in
 the bit-stream.
 All frame-based parameters are packed before sub-frame parameters.
 The parameters for a certain sub-frame are all packed before the following
 sub-frame is packed.
 Note that the 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset 

OL
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset 

 in the parameter description means that the parameter is an open loop estimatio
n based on the whole frame.
\layout Standard


\begin_inset Float table
placement h
wide true
collapsed false

\layout Standard


\begin_inset  Tabular
<lyxtabular version="3" rows="12" columns="11">
<features>
<column alignment="center" valignment="top" leftline="true" width="0pt">
<column alignment="center" valignment="top" leftline="true" width="0pt">
<column alignment="center" valignment="top" leftline="true" width="0pt">
<column alignment="center" valignment="top" leftline="true" width="0pt">
<column alignment="center" valignment="top" leftline="true" width="0pt">
<column alignment="center" valignment="top" leftline="true" width="0pt">
<column alignment="center" valignment="top" leftline="true" width="0pt">
<column alignment="center" valignment="top" leftline="true" width="0pt">
<column alignment="center" valignment="top" leftline="true" width="0pt">
<column alignment="center" valignment="top" leftline="true" width="0pt">
<column alignment="center" valignment="top" leftline="true" rightline="true" width="0pt">
<row topline="true" bottomline="true">
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

Parameter
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

Update rate
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

0
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

1
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

2
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

3
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

4
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

5
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" rightline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

6
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" rightline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

7
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" rightline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

8
\end_inset 
</cell>
</row>
<row topline="true">
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

Wideband bit
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

frame
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

1
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

1
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

1
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

1
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

1
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

1
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" rightline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

1
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" rightline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

1
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" rightline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

1
\end_inset 
</cell>
</row>
<row topline="true">
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

Mode ID
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

frame
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

4
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

4
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

4
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

4
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

4
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

4
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" rightline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

4
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" rightline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

4
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" rightline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

4
\end_inset 
</cell>
</row>
<row topline="true">
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

LSP
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

frame
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

0
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

18
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

18
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

18
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

18
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

30
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" rightline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

30
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" rightline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

30
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" rightline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

18
\end_inset 
</cell>
</row>
<row topline="true">
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

OL pitch
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

frame
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

0
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

7
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

7
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

0
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

0
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

0
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" rightline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

0
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" rightline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

0
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" rightline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

7
\end_inset 
</cell>
</row>
<row topline="true">
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

OL pitch gain
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

frame
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

0
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

4
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

0
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

0
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

0
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

0
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" rightline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

0
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" rightline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

0
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" rightline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

4
\end_inset 
</cell>
</row>
<row topline="true">
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

OL Exc gain
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

frame
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

0
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

5
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

5
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

5
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

5
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

5
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" rightline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

5
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" rightline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

5
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" rightline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

5
\end_inset 
</cell>
</row>
<row topline="true">
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

Fine pitch
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

sub-frame
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

0
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

0
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

0
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

7
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

7
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

7
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" rightline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

7
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" rightline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

7
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" rightline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

0
\end_inset 
</cell>
</row>
<row topline="true">
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

Pitch gain
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

sub-frame
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

0
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

0
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

5
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

5
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

5
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

7
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" rightline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

7
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" rightline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

7
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" rightline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

0
\end_inset 
</cell>
</row>
<row topline="true">
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

Innovation gain
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

sub-frame
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

0
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

1
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

0
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

1
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

1
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

3
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" rightline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

3
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" rightline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

3
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" rightline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

0
\end_inset 
</cell>
</row>
<row topline="true" bottomline="true">
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

Innovation VQ
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

sub-frame
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

0
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

0
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

16
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

20
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

35
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

48
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" rightline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

64
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" rightline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

96
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" rightline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

10
\end_inset 
</cell>
</row>
<row topline="true" bottomline="true">
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

Total
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

frame
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

5
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

43
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

119
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

160
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

220
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

300
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" rightline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

364
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" rightline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

492
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" rightline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

79
\end_inset 
</cell>
</row>
</lyxtabular>

\end_inset 


\layout Caption

Bit allocation for narrowband modes
\begin_inset LatexCommand \label{cap:bits-narrowband}

\end_inset 


\end_inset 


\layout Standard

So far, no MOS (Mean Opinion Score
\begin_inset LatexCommand \index{mean opinion score}

\end_inset 

) subjective evaluation has been performed for Speex.
 In order to give an idea of the quality achivable with it, table 
\begin_inset LatexCommand \ref{cap:quality_vs_bps}

\end_inset 

 presents my own subjective opinion on it.
 It sould be noted that different people will perceive the quality differently
 and that the person that designed the codec often has a bias (one way or
 another) when it comes to subjective evaluation.
 Last thing, it should be noted that for most codecs (including Speex) encoding
 quality sometimes varies depending on the input.
 Note that the complexity is only approximate (within 0.5 mflops and using
 the lowest complexity setting).
 Decoding requires approximately 0.5 mflops
\begin_inset LatexCommand \index{complexity}

\end_inset 

 in most modes (1 mflops with perceptual enhancement).
\layout Standard


\begin_inset Float table
placement h
wide true
collapsed false

\layout Standard


\begin_inset  Tabular
<lyxtabular version="3" rows="17" columns="4">
<features>
<column alignment="center" valignment="top" leftline="true" width="0pt">
<column alignment="center" valignment="top" leftline="true" width="0pt">
<column alignment="center" valignment="top" leftline="true" width="0pt">
<column alignment="center" valignment="top" leftline="true" rightline="true" width="0pt">
<row topline="true" bottomline="true">
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

Mode
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

Bit-rate
\begin_inset LatexCommand \index{bit-rate}

\end_inset 

 (bps)
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

mflops
\begin_inset LatexCommand \index{complexity}

\end_inset 


\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" rightline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

Quality/description
\end_inset 
</cell>
</row>
<row topline="true">
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

0
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

250
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

N/A
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" rightline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

No transmission (DTX)
\end_inset 
</cell>
</row>
<row topline="true">
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

1
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

2,150
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

6
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" rightline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

Vocoder (mostly for comfort noise)
\end_inset 
</cell>
</row>
<row topline="true">
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

2
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

5,950
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

9
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" rightline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

Very noticeable artifacts/noise, good intelligibility
\end_inset 
</cell>
</row>
<row topline="true">
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

3
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

8,000
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

10
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" rightline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

Artifacts/noise sometimes noticeable
\end_inset 
</cell>
</row>
<row topline="true">
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

4
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

11,000
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

14
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" rightline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

Artifacts usually noticeable only with headphones
\end_inset 
</cell>
</row>
<row topline="true">
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

5
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

15,000
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

11
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" rightline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

Need good headphones to tell the difference
\end_inset 
</cell>
</row>
<row topline="true">
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

6
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

18,200
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

17.5
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" rightline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

Hard to tell the difference even with good headphones
\end_inset 
</cell>
</row>
<row topline="true">
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

7
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

24,600
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

14.5
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" rightline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

Completely transparent for voice, good quality music
\end_inset 
</cell>
</row>
<row topline="true">
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

8
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

3,950
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

10.5
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" rightline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

Very noticeable artifacts/noise, good intelligibility
\end_inset 
</cell>
</row>
<row topline="true">
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

9
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

N/A
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

N/A
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" rightline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

reserved
\end_inset 
</cell>
</row>
<row topline="true">
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

10
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

N/A
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

N/A
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" rightline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

reserved
\end_inset 
</cell>
</row>
<row topline="true">
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

11
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

N/A
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

N/A
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" rightline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

reserved
\end_inset 
</cell>
</row>
<row topline="true">
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

12
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

N/A
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

N/A
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" rightline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

reserved
\end_inset 
</cell>
</row>
<row topline="true">
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

13
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

N/A
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

N/A
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" rightline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

Application-defined, interpreted by callback or skipped
\end_inset 
</cell>
</row>
<row topline="true">
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

14
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

N/A
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

N/A
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" rightline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

Speex in-band signaling
\end_inset 
</cell>
</row>
<row topline="true" bottomline="true">
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

15
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

N/A
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

N/A
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" rightline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

Terminator code
\end_inset 
</cell>
</row>
</lyxtabular>

\end_inset 


\layout Caption

Quality versus bit-rate
\begin_inset LatexCommand \label{cap:quality_vs_bps}

\end_inset 


\end_inset 


\layout Subsection

Perceptual enhancement
\begin_inset LatexCommand \index{perceptual enhancement}

\end_inset 


\layout Standard

This part of the codec only applies to the decoder and can even be changed
 without affecting inter-operability.
 For that reason, the implementation provided and described here should
 only be considered as a reference implementation.
 The enhancement system is divided into two parts.
 First, the synthesis filter 
\begin_inset Formula $S(z)=1/A(z)$
\end_inset 

 is replaced by an enhanced filter
\begin_inset Formula \[
S'(z)=\frac{A\left(z/a_{2}\right)A\left(z/a_{3}\right)}{A\left(z\right)A\left(z/a_{1}\right)}\]

\end_inset 

where 
\begin_inset Formula $a_{1}$
\end_inset 

 and 
\begin_inset Formula $a_{2}$
\end_inset 

 depend on the mode in use and 
\begin_inset Formula $a_{3}=\frac{1}{r}\left(1-\frac{1-ra_{1}}{1-ra_{2}}\right)$
\end_inset 

 with 
\begin_inset Formula $r=.9$
\end_inset 

.
 The second part of the enhancement consists of using a comb filter to enhance
 the pitch in the excitation domain.
 
\layout Section
\pagebreak_top 
Speex wideband mode (sub-band CELP)
\begin_inset LatexCommand \index{wideband}

\end_inset 


\begin_inset LatexCommand \label{sec:Speex-wideband-mode}

\end_inset 


\layout Standard

For wideband, the Speex approach uses a 
\emph on 
q
\emph default 
uadrature 
\emph on 
m
\emph default 
irror 
\emph on 
f
\emph default 
ilter
\begin_inset LatexCommand \index{quadrature mirror filter}

\end_inset 

 (QMF) to split the band in two.
 The 16 kHz signal is thus divided into two 8 kHz signals, one representing
 the low band (0-4 kHz), the other the high band (4-8 kHz).
 The low band is encoded with the narrowband mode described in section 
\begin_inset LatexCommand \ref{sec:Speex-narrowband-mode}

\end_inset 

 in such a way that the resulting 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset 

embedded narrowband bit-stream
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset 

 can also be decoded with the narrowband decoder.
 Since the low band encoding has already been described, only the high band
 encoding is described in this section.
\layout Subsection

Linear Prediction
\layout Standard

The linear prediction part used for the high-band is very similar to what
 is done for narrowband.
 The only difference is that we use only 12 bits to encode the high-band
 LSP's using a multi-stage vector quantizer (MSVQ).
 The first level quantizes the 10 coefficients with 6 bits and the error
 is then quantized using 6 bits, too.
\layout Subsection

Pitch Prediction
\layout Standard

That part is easy: there's no pitch prediction for the high-band.
 There are two reasons for that.
 First, there is usually little harmonic structure in this band (above 4
 kHz).
 Second, it would be very hard to implement since the QMF folds the 4-8
 kHz band into 4-0 kHz (reversing the frequency axis), which means that
 the location of the harmonics is no longer at multiples of the fundamental
 (pitch).
\layout Subsection

Excitation Quantization
\layout Standard

The high-band excitation is coded in the same way as for narrowband.
 
\layout Subsection

Bit allocation
\layout Standard

For the wideband mode, the entire narrowband frame is packed before the
 high-band is encoded.
 The narrowband part of the bit-stream is as defined in table 
\begin_inset LatexCommand \ref{cap:bits-narrowband}

\end_inset 

.
 The high-band follows, as described in table 
\begin_inset LatexCommand \ref{cap:bits-wideband}

\end_inset 

.
 This also means that a wideband frame may be correctly decoded by a narrowband
 decoder with the only caveat that if more than one frame is packed in the
 same packet, the decoder will need to skip the high-band parts in order
 to sync with the bit-stream.
\layout Standard


\begin_inset Float table
placement h
wide true
collapsed false

\layout Standard


\begin_inset  Tabular
<lyxtabular version="3" rows="7" columns="7">
<features>
<column alignment="center" valignment="top" leftline="true" width="0pt">
<column alignment="center" valignment="top" leftline="true" width="0pt">
<column alignment="center" valignment="top" leftline="true" width="0pt">
<column alignment="center" valignment="top" leftline="true" width="0pt">
<column alignment="center" valignment="top" leftline="true" width="0pt">
<column alignment="center" valignment="top" leftline="true" width="0pt">
<column alignment="center" valignment="top" leftline="true" rightline="true" width="0pt">
<row topline="true" bottomline="true">
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

Parameter
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

Update rate
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

0
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

1
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

2
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

3
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

4
\end_inset 
</cell>
</row>
<row topline="true">
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

Wideband bit
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

frame
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

1
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

1
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

1
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

1
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

1
\end_inset 
</cell>
</row>
<row topline="true">
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

Mode ID
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

frame
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

3
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

3
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

3
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

3
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

3
\end_inset 
</cell>
</row>
<row topline="true">
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

LSP
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

frame
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

0
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

12
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

12
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

12
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

12
\end_inset 
</cell>
</row>
<row topline="true">
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

Excitation gain
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

sub-frame
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

0
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

5
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

4
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

4
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

4
\end_inset 
</cell>
</row>
<row topline="true" bottomline="true">
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

Excitation VQ
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

sub-frame
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

0
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

0
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

20
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

40
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

80
\end_inset 
</cell>
</row>
<row topline="true" bottomline="true">
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

Total
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

frame
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

4
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

36
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

112
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

192
\end_inset 
</cell>
<cell alignment="center" valignment="top" topline="true" leftline="true" usebox="none">
\begin_inset Text

\layout Standard

352
\end_inset 
</cell>
</row>
</lyxtabular>

\end_inset 


\layout Caption

Bit allocation for high-band in wideband mode
\begin_inset LatexCommand \label{cap:bits-wideband}

\end_inset 


\end_inset 


\layout Standard


\begin_inset ERT
status Open

\layout Standard

\backslash 
clearpage
\end_inset 


\layout Standard


\begin_inset ERT
status Collapsed

\layout Standard

\backslash 
clearpage
\end_inset 


\layout Section
\start_of_appendix 
FAQ
\layout Subsection*

Vorbis is open-source
\begin_inset LatexCommand \index{open-source}

\end_inset 

 and patent-free
\begin_inset LatexCommand \index{patent}

\end_inset 

; why do we need Speex?
\layout Standard

Vorbis is a great project but its goals are not the same as Speex.
 Vorbis is mostly aimed at compressing music and audio in general, while
 Speex targets speech only.
 For that reason Speex can achieve much better results than Vorbis on speech,
 typically 2-4 times higher compression at equal quality.
\layout Subsection*

Isn't there a GPL implementation of the GSM-FR codec? Why is Speex necessary?
\layout Standard

First of all, it's not clear whether GSM-FR is covered by a Philips patent
 (see http://kbs.cs.tu-berlin.de/~jutta/toast.html).
 Also, GSM-FR offers mediocre quality at a relatively high bit-rate, while
 Speex can offer equivalent quality at almost half the bit-rate.
 Last but not least, Speex offers a wide range of bit-rates and sampling
 rates, while GSM-FR is limited to 8 kHz speech at 13 kbps.
\layout Subsection*

Under what license is Speex released?
\layout Standard

As of version 1.0 beta 1, Speex is released under Xiph's BSD-like license.
 This license is the most permissive of the open-source licenses.
\layout Subsection*

Ogg
\begin_inset LatexCommand \index{Ogg}

\end_inset 

, Speex, Vorbis
\begin_inset LatexCommand \index{Vorbis}

\end_inset 

, what's the difference?
\layout Standard

Ogg is a container format for holding multimedia data.
 Vorbis is an audio codec that uses Ogg to store its bit-streams as files,
 hence the name Ogg Vorbis.
 Speex also uses the Ogg format to store its bit-streams as files, so technicall
y they would be 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset 

Ogg Speex
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset 

 files (I prefer to call them just Speex files).
 One difference with Vorbis however, is that Speex is less tied with Ogg.
 Actually, if what you do is Voice of IP (VoIP), you don't need Ogg at all.
\layout Subsection*

What's the extension for Speex?
\layout Standard

Speex files have the .spx extension.
 Note, however that the Speex tools (speexenc, speexdec) do not rely on
 the extension at all, so any extension will work.
\layout Subsection*

Can I use Speex for compressing music
\begin_inset LatexCommand \index{music}

\end_inset 

?
\layout Standard

Just like Vorbis is not really adapted to speech, Speex is really not adapted
 for music.
 In most cases, you'll be better of with Vorbis when it comes to music.
\layout Subsection*

I converted some MP3's to Speex and the quality is bad.
 What's wrong?
\layout Standard

This is called transcoding and it will always result in much poorer quality
 than the original MP3.
 Unless you have a really good (size) reason to do so, never transcode speech.
 This is even valid for self transcoding (tandeming), i.e.
 If you decode a Speex file and re-encode it again at the same bit-rate,
 you will lose quality.
\layout Subsection*

Does Speex run on Windows?
\layout Standard

Compilation on Windows has been supported since version 0.8.0.
 There are also several front-ends available from the website.
\layout Subsection*

Why is encoding so slow compared to decoding?
\layout Standard

For most kinds of compression, encoding is inherently slower than decoding.
 In the case of Speex, encoding consists of finding, for each vector of
 5 to 10 samples, the entry that matches the best within a codebook consisting
 of 16 to 256 entries.
 On the other hand, at decoding all that needs to be done is look up the
 right entry in the codebook using the encoded index.
 Since a lookup is much faster than a search, the decoder works much faster
 than the encoder.
\layout Subsection*

Why is Speex so slow on my iPaq (or insert any platform without an FPU)?
\layout Standard

Well, the parenthesis provides the answer: no FPU (floating-point unit).
 The Speex code makes heavy use of floating-point operations.
 On devices with no FPU, all floating-point instructions need to be emulated.
 This is a very time consuming operation.
\layout Subsection*

I'm getting unusual background noise (hiss) when using libspeex in my applicatio
n.
 How do I fix that?
\layout Standard

One of the causes could be scaling of the input speech.
 Speex expects signals to have a 
\begin_inset Formula $\pm2^{15}$
\end_inset 

 (signed short) dynamic range.
 If the dynamic range of your signals is too small (e.g.
 
\begin_inset Formula $\pm1.0$
\end_inset 

), you will suffer important quantization noise.
 A good target is to have a dynamic range around 
\begin_inset Formula $\pm8000$
\end_inset 

 which is large enough, but small enough to make sure there's no clipping
 when converting back to signed short.
\layout Subsection*

I get very distorted speech when using libspeex in my application.
 What's wrong?
\layout Standard

There are many possible causes for that.
 One of them is errors in the way the bits are manipulated.
 Another possible cause is the use of the same encoder or decoder state
 for more than one audio stream (channel), which produces strange effects
 with the filter memories.
 If the input speech has an amplitude close to 
\begin_inset Formula $\pm2^{15}$
\end_inset 

, it is possible that at decoding, the amplitude be a bit higher than that,
 causing clipping when saving as 16-bit PCM.
\layout Subsection*

How does Speex compare to other proprietary codecs?
\layout Standard

It's hard to give precise figures since no formal listening tests have been
 performed yet.
 All I can say is that in terms of quality, Speex competes on the same ground
 as other proprietary codecs (not necessarily the best, but not the worst
 either).
 Speex also has many features that are not present in most other codecs.
 These include variable bit-rate (VBR), integration of narrowband and wideband,
 as well as stereo support.
 Of course, another area where Speex is really hard to beat is the quality/price
 ratio.
 Unlike many very expensive codecs, Speex is free and anyone may distribute/modi
fy it at will.
\layout Subsection*

Can Speex pass DTMF
\begin_inset LatexCommand \index{DTMF}

\end_inset 

?
\layout Standard

I guess it all depends on the bit-rate used.
 Though no formal testing has yet been performed, I'd say don't go below
 the 15 kbps mode if you want DTMF to be transmitted correctly.
 DTMF at 8 kbps may work but your mileage may vary.
 Also, make sure you don't use the lowest complexity (see SPEEX_SET_COMPLEXITY
 or --comp option), as it causes significant noise.
\layout Subsection*

Can Speex pass V.9x modem signals correctly?
\layout Standard

If I could do that I'd be very rich by now :-)
\layout Subsection*

What is your (Jean-Marc) relationship with the University of Sherbrooke
 and how does Speex fit into that?
\layout Standard

Currently (2003/03/09), I'm doing a Ph.D.
 at the University of Sherbrooke in mobile robotics.
 Although I did my master with the Sherbrooke speech coding group (in speech
 enhancement, not coding), I am not associated with them anymore.
 It should 
\series bold 
not
\series default 
 be understood that they or the University of Sherbrooke endorse the Speex
 project in any way.
 Furthermore, Speex does not make use of any code or proprietary technology
 developed in the Sherbrooke speech coding group.
 
\layout Subsection*

CELP, ACELP
\begin_inset LatexCommand \index{ACELP}

\end_inset 

, what's the difference?
\layout Standard

CELP stands for 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset 

Code Excited Linear Prediction
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset 

, while ACELP stands for 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset 


\emph on 
Algebraic
\emph default 
 Code Excited Linear Prediction
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset 

.
 That means ACELP is a CELP technique that uses an algebraic codebook represente
d as a sum of unit pulses, thus making the codebook search much more efficient.
 This technique was invented at the University of Sherbrooke and is now
 one of the most widely used form of CELP.
 Unfortunately, since it is patented, it cannot be used in Speex.
\layout Section
\pagebreak_top 
Sample code
\begin_inset LatexCommand \label{sec:Sample-code}

\end_inset 


\layout Standard

This section shows sample code for encoding and decoding speech using the
 Speex API.
 The commands can be used to encode and decode a file by calling:
\family typewriter 

\newline 
% sampleenc in_file.sw | sampledec out_file.sw
\family default 

\newline 
where both files are raw (no header) files encoded at 16 bits per sample
 (in the machine natural endianness).
\layout Subsection

sampleenc.c
\layout Standard

sampleenc takes a raw 16 bits/sample file, encodes it and outputs a Speex
 stream to stdout.
 Note that the packing used is NOT compatible with that of speexenc/speexdec.
\layout Standard


\begin_inset Include \verbatiminput{sampleenc.c}
preview false

\end_inset 


\layout Subsection

sampledec.c
\layout Standard

sampledec reads a Speex stream from stdin, decodes it and outputs it to
 a raw 16 bits/sample file.
 Note that the packing used is NOT compatible with that of speexenc/speexdec.
\layout Standard


\begin_inset Include \verbatiminput{sampledec.c}
preview false

\end_inset 


\layout Section
\pagebreak_top 
IETF RTP Profile
\begin_inset LatexCommand \label{sec:IETF-draft}

\end_inset 


\layout Standard


\begin_inset Include \verbatiminput{draft-herlein-speex-rtp-profile-00.txt}
preview false

\end_inset 


\layout Section
\pagebreak_top 
GNU Free Documentation License
\layout Standard

Version 1.1, March 2000
\layout Standard

Copyright (C) 2000 Free Software Foundation, Inc.
 59 Temple Place, Suite 330, Boston, MA 02111-1307 USA Everyone is permitted
 to copy and distribute verbatim copies of this license document, but changing
 it is not allowed.
 
\layout Subsection*

0.
 PREAMBLE
\layout Standard

The purpose of this License is to make a manual, textbook, or other written
 document "free" in the sense of freedom: to assure everyone the effective
 freedom to copy and redistribute it, with or without modifying it, either
 commercially or noncommercially.
 Secondarily, this License preserves for the author and publisher a way
 to get credit for their work, while not being considered responsible for
 modifications made by others.
\layout Standard

This License is a kind of "copyleft", which means that derivative works
 of the document must themselves be free in the same sense.
 It complements the GNU General Public License, which is a copyleft license
 designed for free software.
\layout Standard

We have designed this License in order to use it for manuals for free software,
 because free software needs free documentation: a free program should come
 with manuals providing the same freedoms that the software does.
 But this License is not limited to software manuals; it can be used for
 any textual work, regardless of subject matter or whether it is published
 as a printed book.
 We recommend this License principally for works whose purpose is instruction
 or reference.
 
\layout Subsection*

1.
 APPLICABILITY AND DEFINITIONS
\layout Standard

This License applies to any manual or other work that contains a notice
 placed by the copyright holder saying it can be distributed under the terms
 of this License.
 The "Document", below, refers to any such manual or work.
 Any member of the public is a licensee, and is addressed as "you".
\layout Standard

A "Modified Version" of the Document means any work containing the Document
 or a portion of it, either copied verbatim, or with modifications and/or
 translated into another language.
\layout Standard

A "Secondary Section" is a named appendix or a front-matter section of the
 Document that deals exclusively with the relationship of the publishers
 or authors of the Document to the Document's overall subject (or to related
 matters) and contains nothing that could fall directly within that overall
 subject.
 (For example, if the Document is in part a textbook of mathematics, a Secondary
 Section may not explain any mathematics.) The relationship could be a matter
 of historical connection with the subject or with related matters, or of
 legal, commercial, philosophical, ethical or political position regarding
 them.
\layout Standard

The "Invariant Sections" are certain Secondary Sections whose titles are
 designated, as being those of Invariant Sections, in the notice that says
 that the Document is released under this License.
\layout Standard

The "Cover Texts" are certain short passages of text that are listed, as
 Front-Cover Texts or Back-Cover Texts, in the notice that says that the
 Document is released under this License.
\layout Standard

A "Transparent" copy of the Document means a machine-readable copy, represented
 in a format whose specification is available to the general public, whose
 contents can be viewed and edited directly and straightforwardly with generic
 text editors or (for images composed of pixels) generic paint programs
 or (for drawings) some widely available drawing editor, and that is suitable
 for input to text formatters or for automatic translation to a variety
 of formats suitable for input to text formatters.
 A copy made in an otherwise Transparent file format whose markup has been
 designed to thwart or discourage subsequent modification by readers is
 not Transparent.
 A copy that is not "Transparent" is called "Opaque".
\layout Standard

Examples of suitable formats for Transparent copies include plain ASCII
 without markup, Texinfo input format, LaTeX input format, SGML or XML using
 a publicly available DTD, and standard-conforming simple HTML designed
 for human modification.
 Opaque formats include PostScript, PDF, proprietary formats that can be
 read and edited only by proprietary word processors, SGML or XML for which
 the DTD and/or processing tools are not generally available, and the machine-ge
nerated HTML produced by some word processors for output purposes only.
\layout Standard

The "Title Page" means, for a printed book, the title page itself, plus
 such following pages as are needed to hold, legibly, the material this
 License requires to appear in the title page.
 For works in formats which do not have any title page as such, "Title Page"
 means the text near the most prominent appearance of the work's title,
 preceding the beginning of the body of the text.
\layout Subsection*

2.
 VERBATIM COPYING
\layout Standard

You may copy and distribute the Document in any medium, either commercially
 or noncommercially, provided that this License, the copyright notices,
 and the license notice saying this License applies to the Document are
 reproduced in all copies, and that you add no other conditions whatsoever
 to those of this License.
 You may not use technical measures to obstruct or control the reading or
 further copying of the copies you make or distribute.
 However, you may accept compensation in exchange for copies.
 If you distribute a large enough number of copies you must also follow
 the conditions in section 3.
\layout Standard

You may also lend copies, under the same conditions stated above, and you
 may publicly display copies.
\layout Subsection*

3.
 COPYING IN QUANTITY
\layout Standard

If you publish printed copies of the Document numbering more than 100, and
 the Document's license notice requires Cover Texts, you must enclose the
 copies in covers that carry, clearly and legibly, all these Cover Texts:
 Front-Cover Texts on the front cover, and Back-Cover Texts on the back
 cover.
 Both covers must also clearly and legibly identify you as the publisher
 of these copies.
 The front cover must present the full title with all words of the title
 equally prominent and visible.
 You may add other material on the covers in addition.
 Copying with changes limited to the covers, as long as they preserve the
 title of the Document and satisfy these conditions, can be treated as verbatim
 copying in other respects.
\layout Standard

If the required texts for either cover are too voluminous to fit legibly,
 you should put the first ones listed (as many as fit reasonably) on the
 actual cover, and continue the rest onto adjacent pages.
\layout Standard

If you publish or distribute Opaque copies of the Document numbering more
 than 100, you must either include a machine-readable Transparent copy along
 with each Opaque copy, or state in or with each Opaque copy a publicly-accessib
le computer-network location containing a complete Transparent copy of the
 Document, free of added material, which the general network-using public
 has access to download anonymously at no charge using public-standard network
 protocols.
 If you use the latter option, you must take reasonably prudent steps, when
 you begin distribution of Opaque copies in quantity, to ensure that this
 Transparent copy will remain thus accessible at the stated location until
 at least one year after the last time you distribute an Opaque copy (directly
 or through your agents or retailers) of that edition to the public.
\layout Standard

It is requested, but not required, that you contact the authors of the Document
 well before redistributing any large number of copies, to give them a chance
 to provide you with an updated version of the Document.
 
\layout Subsection*

4.
 MODIFICATIONS
\layout Standard

You may copy and distribute a Modified Version of the Document under the
 conditions of sections 2 and 3 above, provided that you release the Modified
 Version under precisely this License, with the Modified Version filling
 the role of the Document, thus licensing distribution and modification
 of the Modified Version to whoever possesses a copy of it.
 In addition, you must do these things in the Modified Version: 
\layout Itemize

A.
 Use in the Title Page (and on the covers, if any) a title distinct from
 that of the Document, and from those of previous versions (which should,
 if there were any, be listed in the History section of the Document).
 You may use the same title as a previous version if the original publisher
 of that version gives permission.
\layout Itemize

B.
 List on the Title Page, as authors, one or more persons or entities responsible
 for authorship of the modifications in the Modified Version, together with
 at least five of the principal authors of the Document (all of its principal
 authors, if it has less than five).
\layout Itemize

C.
 State on the Title page the name of the publisher of the Modified Version,
 as the publisher.
\layout Itemize

D.
 Preserve all the copyright notices of the Document.
\layout Itemize

E.
 Add an appropriate copyright notice for your modifications adjacent to
 the other copyright notices.
\layout Itemize

F.
 Include, immediately after the copyright notices, a license notice giving
 the public permission to use the Modified Version under the terms of this
 License, in the form shown in the Addendum below.
\layout Itemize

G.
 Preserve in that license notice the full lists of Invariant Sections and
 required Cover Texts given in the Document's license notice.
\layout Itemize

H.
 Include an unaltered copy of this License.
\layout Itemize

I.
 Preserve the section entitled "History", and its title, and add to it an
 item stating at least the title, year, new authors, and publisher of the
 Modified Version as given on the Title Page.
 If there is no section entitled "History" in the Document, create one stating
 the title, year, authors, and publisher of the Document as given on its
 Title Page, then add an item describing the Modified Version as stated
 in the previous sentence.
\layout Itemize

J.
 Preserve the network location, if any, given in the Document for public
 access to a Transparent copy of the Document, and likewise the network
 locations given in the Document for previous versions it was based on.
 These may be placed in the "History" section.
 You may omit a network location for a work that was published at least
 four years before the Document itself, or if the original publisher of
 the version it refers to gives permission.
\layout Itemize

K.
 In any section entitled "Acknowledgements" or "Dedications", preserve the
 section's title, and preserve in the section all the substance and tone
 of each of the contributor acknowledgements and/or dedications given therein.
\layout Itemize

L.
 Preserve all the Invariant Sections of the Document, unaltered in their
 text and in their titles.
 Section numbers or the equivalent are not considered part of the section
 titles.
\layout Itemize

M.
 Delete any section entitled "Endorsements".
 Such a section may not be included in the Modified Version.
\layout Itemize

N.
 Do not retitle any existing section as "Endorsements" or to conflict in
 title with any Invariant Section.
 
\layout Standard

If the Modified Version includes new front-matter sections or appendices
 that qualify as Secondary Sections and contain no material copied from
 the Document, you may at your option designate some or all of these sections
 as invariant.
 To do this, add their titles to the list of Invariant Sections in the Modified
 Version's license notice.
 These titles must be distinct from any other section titles.
\layout Standard

You may add a section entitled "Endorsements", provided it contains nothing
 but endorsements of your Modified Version by various parties--for example,
 statements of peer review or that the text has been approved by an organization
 as the authoritative definition of a standard.
\layout Standard

You may add a passage of up to five words as a Front-Cover Text, and a passage
 of up to 25 words as a Back-Cover Text, to the end of the list of Cover
 Texts in the Modified Version.
 Only one passage of Front-Cover Text and one of Back-Cover Text may be
 added by (or through arrangements made by) any one entity.
 If the Document already includes a cover text for the same cover, previously
 added by you or by arrangement made by the same entity you are acting on
 behalf of, you may not add another; but you may replace the old one, on
 explicit permission from the previous publisher that added the old one.
\layout Standard

The author(s) and publisher(s) of the Document do not by this License give
 permission to use their names for publicity for or to assert or imply endorseme
nt of any Modified Version.
 
\layout Subsection*

5.
 COMBINING DOCUMENTS
\layout Standard

You may combine the Document with other documents released under this License,
 under the terms defined in section 4 above for modified versions, provided
 that you include in the combination all of the Invariant Sections of all
 of the original documents, unmodified, and list them all as Invariant Sections
 of your combined work in its license notice.
\layout Standard

The combined work need only contain one copy of this License, and multiple
 identical Invariant Sections may be replaced with a single copy.
 If there are multiple Invariant Sections with the same name but different
 contents, make the title of each such section unique by adding at the end
 of it, in parentheses, the name of the original author or publisher of
 that section if known, or else a unique number.
 Make the same adjustment to the section titles in the list of Invariant
 Sections in the license notice of the combined work.
\layout Standard

In the combination, you must combine any sections entitled "History" in
 the various original documents, forming one section entitled "History";
 likewise combine any sections entitled "Acknowledgements", and any sections
 entitled "Dedications".
 You must delete all sections entitled "Endorsements."
\layout Subsection*

6.
 COLLECTIONS OF DOCUMENTS
\layout Standard

You may make a collection consisting of the Document and other documents
 released under this License, and replace the individual copies of this
 License in the various documents with a single copy that is included in
 the collection, provided that you follow the rules of this License for
 verbatim copying of each of the documents in all other respects.
\layout Standard

You may extract a single document from such a collection, and distribute
 it individually under this License, provided you insert a copy of this
 License into the extracted document, and follow this License in all other
 respects regarding verbatim copying of that document.
 
\layout Subsection*

7.
 AGGREGATION WITH INDEPENDENT WORKS
\layout Standard

A compilation of the Document or its derivatives with other separate and
 independent documents or works, in or on a volume of a storage or distribution
 medium, does not as a whole count as a Modified Version of the Document,
 provided no compilation copyright is claimed for the compilation.
 Such a compilation is called an "aggregate", and this License does not
 apply to the other self-contained works thus compiled with the Document,
 on account of their being thus compiled, if they are not themselves derivative
 works of the Document.
\layout Standard

If the Cover Text requirement of section 3 is applicable to these copies
 of the Document, then if the Document is less than one quarter of the entire
 aggregate, the Document's Cover Texts may be placed on covers that surround
 only the Document within the aggregate.
 Otherwise they must appear on covers around the whole aggregate.
\layout Subsection*

8.
 TRANSLATION
\layout Standard

Translation is considered a kind of modification, so you may distribute
 translations of the Document under the terms of section 4.
 Replacing Invariant Sections with translations requires special permission
 from their copyright holders, but you may include translations of some
 or all Invariant Sections in addition to the original versions of these
 Invariant Sections.
 You may include a translation of this License provided that you also include
 the original English version of this License.
 In case of a disagreement between the translation and the original English
 version of this License, the original English version will prevail.
\layout Subsection*

9.
 TERMINATION
\layout Standard

You may not copy, modify, sublicense, or distribute the Document except
 as expressly provided for under this License.
 Any other attempt to copy, modify, sublicense or distribute the Document
 is void, and will automatically terminate your rights under this License.
 However, parties who have received copies, or rights, from you under this
 License will not have their licenses terminated so long as such parties
 remain in full compliance.
 
\layout Subsection*

10.
 FUTURE REVISIONS OF THIS LICENSE
\layout Standard

The Free Software Foundation may publish new, revised versions of the GNU
 Free Documentation License from time to time.
 Such new versions will be similar in spirit to the present version, but
 may differ in detail to address new problems or concerns.
 See http://www.gnu.org/copyleft/.
\layout Standard

Each version of the License is given a distinguishing version number.
 If the Document specifies that a particular numbered version of this License
 "or any later version" applies to it, you have the option of following
 the terms and conditions either of that specified version or of any later
 version that has been published (not as a draft) by the Free Software Foundatio
n.
 If the Document does not specify a version number of this License, you
 may choose any version ever published (not as a draft) by the Free Software
 Foundation.
\layout Standard


\begin_inset LatexCommand \printindex{}

\end_inset 


\the_end
